It took me a long while to get used to the potlucks.
You know, we have a potluck, somebody's leaving, somebody has a baby, somebody gets married.
We had a potluck one time when no one was leaving.
And they start at about 11.30 and they don't end until about 2.
And my style was pretty, you know, have a lot of balls bounce in the air a lot of time, and I really had to get used to this.
I also had to get used to the way students responded coming out of Maryland and Vermont.
And I always taught a class.
I've never had any year while I've been an administrator where I didn't teach.
And in the dean's office, every associate taught as well.
I couldn't do it during the day, but I did it in the evening.
One of the things that I found is people don't talk back to you if you're a professor, and they call you sir.
And what I was used to, you know, it didn't make much difference if you were a professor or not.
In Maryland, especially, you were challenged.
In fact, I have had students in my classes
take the chalk out of my hand and cross out stuff that I'd written on the board.
And I love that.
I love that.
And also, people, I can remember the first department meeting.
We sat around and I said to them, I said to the department heads, I said, you know, you've been here a lot longer than I have.
What do you think we ought to do about this?"
And I could see him looking at me, you know, does this guy really mean it?
About six months after that, Len Ponder, who was one of the department heads, said, you know, we talked about this after we met.
We said, what the hell we got here?
This guy is our dean and he's asking us what we should do?
What are we doing?
And my style was a little different than the previous deans, although he was very effective.
But they had to put up with me with that.
And we later got to a real commitment with sharing.
I got to the point with the department heads where they were actually sharing their budgets with each other.
And we'd have ends of the lines which we'd swap and all of that.
And we had very great involvement of the faculty.
We created something called Centers of Inquiry.
And one of the great things about this place were the resources we had.
And out of our retreat, our first retreat, came the idea that we ought to create these centers of inquiry which were centers of interest that the faculty could develop.
And so I took all the discretionary money I could find and I gave it to this faculty oversight committee to stimulate inquiry, including research.
We didn't want to use the term research because we felt that inquiry
Research was one type of inquiry.
And when you mentioned research in those days, people kept thinking of experimental groups and all of that.
What we were talking about was developing new courses, delving into computers.
In those days, we didn't have any computers.
But what we did, that was one of the first inquiry areas that was set up.
What do we need to do?
And the first committee that had 22 people on it, that represented all departments, came up with this inquiry group report on what the college ought to do in the area of computers.
They came out with 21 recommendations around four areas.
One was new courses we needed, new equipment we needed, professional development that we needed for the faculty, and then how we should use it with research.
And talk about the luck of a new dean.
The day the committee handed me the report, the Friday afternoon,
that they handed me their report, I got a call from Chuck McCandless.
And Chuck said, Dean, if you had $93,000 to spend for computers, how would you spend it?
And I said, Chuck, you won't believe this, but I have here the best report I've ever received from a faculty group on what the college ought to be doing in the next five years in the area of computers.
If you'll give us the weekend, we'll get you a budget by Monday morning.
So I brought the inquiry group back together.
We took these 21, they were very specific recommendations, like bringing in people from other places who could teach us, getting IBM to give us some free computers, creating a research assistance lab.
I mean, they were very specific.
So you could put a budget with them.
We later found that these inquiry groups, even though we set them up as professional development activities, became wonderful sources for writing grants.
Because if you can identify areas that the faculty is interested in,
And you've got people to do it.
If you get the money, it's a heck of a lot better than just writing a proposal to get the money.
You're writing a proposal to get the money that the faculty want to do.
So anyway, we put together a budget for $113,000.
We thought there's money over there.
We might get a little more.
By the Wednesday of the fall, after the Friday they submitted the report, I was able to go back to this group and tell them,
that the institution had come up with $113,000 to implement their ideas.
There's nothing sweeter than that.
Because so many times, faculty spend time on creative ideas and committees that don't go anywhere, because you don't have the money.
When you got here, as you saw
the budget and the salaries and so forth, how did we compare?
Compare it very well.
But also in terms of fairness across colleges.
And the resources, well you remember in those days, one of those years we got a raise in the middle of the year.
the 9% in January?
I mean, that was unheard of.
I'm not going to ask you your salary any other time.
What was your beginning salary?
Beginning salary I think was $40-something, $45,000, something like that.
But I never have taken in my life a job on the business salary.
I've always gone to a place where I felt I could do
what I thought I needed to be doing as a professional and where the challenges were there.
And it was like that experience.
In fact, my whole life has been that way.
Someone said, I will help you.
And everybody else has done this for me, I mean with me.
That's why when I heard one of our Board of Regents members one time say he was a self-made man, I went up to him after and said, I don't think so.
I think if we probe a little further, you'll admit.
In fact, one time, just for the heck of it, we were having a meeting with the deans, and I asked them, who were the three people that influenced their life the most?
Every one of them had a teacher.
Every one of them had a Mrs. Finnegan.
And that's the way it's been with me.
I never had to go to the Chronicle to get a job.
It always ended up like kind of in your situation.
Someone calls, your advisor says, this is open, you're ready for a new experience.
And I have never left
because of the money.
And here, I mean, the resources compared to other places.
The problem is that the faculty oftentimes in the place they're in don't know how bad it is.
In Vermont, we had three faculty to an office.
I mean, here, every faculty member had an office.
When we started to develop the computer thing, we got 55 computers free from IBM, and we had something like 100 faculty wanting to do this.
We brought in a guy from Wellesland to spend the summer with us.
We brought in the associate dean from Michigan State to help us get set up with computers.
resources here, you know.
But it was all based on faculty.
I've always believed that the faculty needs to be committed to these kinds of things.
It's gonna work.
And the whole philosophy of this report was to infuse computers into the life of the college, not to create a separate department.
And that's what happened.
But without the resources, what we began to talk about were workstations.
And the institution started to think about what you need in a workstation to create an effective environment for teaching and research.
And that was the notion.
It was all based on a well thought out
plan that had at the base of it a philosophy, which was a philosophy of sharing, reflecting, evaluating.
As you are getting started, did you get any advice, either sought or unsought advice, from Vice President Prescott, President Miller, Chancellor Huber?
This was the thing that was different about this place.
Even though it was viewed as being highly hierarchical and military from the past history, the advantage of this communication system was that when you asked somebody for something, you got an immediate response.
From the time I came here, I could pick up the phone, not write a letter,
pick up the phone and call the provost's office and get an answer.
And this started with Mac Prescott.
And what I liked about Mac so much was that he had such integrity.
He exuded integrity.
If you asked him something, he'd give you an answer, and you could count on it.
You could take it to the bank.
And he might not even agree with you.
I had a big debate with him one time about wanting to set up experimental high schools, what we were calling teaching centers in those days.
They now call them professional development schools in Houston.
And he wondered why we wanted to go way off campus and have these sites in Houston.
And my pitch was, well, we need to have an urban connection.
And we need to be there.
And what he was worried about was in those days we had this ruling geographically that you couldn't go into some other state university's territory.
And of course, Billy Reagan was saying, I can have people from Harvard and Stanford and Princeton come here and work, but I can't have A&M.
And I want A&M because they've got the people willing to work with us.
He was having trouble getting to the University of Houston until we decided we wanted to go down there.
Then all of a sudden, they wanted to work more closely with him.
Anyway, but he finally said to me, you want to do this?
Fine.
We'll do it.
But I still don't agree with him.
Hubert, from the time I came, first thing he told me, we had a meeting with him.
We were going someplace down at McAllen.
He said, now, this is yours.
Don't ask me
anything about what you ought to do.
You do what you want to do.
Now, I only asked him one question.
I said, what did you have in mind when you created this interdisciplinary studies area?
Because it had vocab in it.
It had industrial ad.
You remember that in the old days?
He said, well, we had a chance to get 18 NDEA fellowships, and I needed a place to put them.
But if you think we ought to do away with it now, that's yours, right?
He never once contacted me about anything or suggested anything.
I communicated with him on a social basis.
But I never once asked him about any of it.
And when I left the deanship, I purposely did that too.
In fact, I moved to a different building.
I moved to Blocker.
Right about the time you arrived, Dr. Miller ceased being president.
Chuck Sampson came in.
Did that have any effect on you?
Not at all.
I got back to Maryland and on my way to the airport I learned that Miller had
had been relieved of his job by Hubert because of the debate over where Extension and Experiment Station ought to report.
Was the College of Education organized by departments, et cetera, in the fashion that you thought was reasonably appropriate?
Well, what we did, we looked at, and we started right out in our retreat.
to develop ways that we could create cross-departmental communication, which has always been a belief of mine.
The integration of ideas is so essential, and you can't just go to one department, especially in something like education.
You take the area of special needs.
You've got curriculum issues.
You've got legal questions.
You've got questions of administration, evaluation.
And then all in one department.
So you've got to get the people together.
And at Vermont, we did away with departments to do this.
We had here and in Maryland.
Marilyn and I had set up institutes where people could create institutes of and faculties of.
And they weren't departmental only.
Here, we created these centers of inquiry, see, which became interdepartmental.
And we always had the inquiry groups report through the Faculty Development Council.
So the department heads were always involved in this.
And the inquiry groups came out of the faculty.
They first did this oversight group, which was selected at the retreat, selected Mike Ash as the first chair of the inquiry activity.
First thing they did was a survey of what were the interest areas.
And then the second, after three years, Dave Olson became the Oversight Committee Chair.
And that became a wonderful training ground for new leadership.
Mike went from that to become department head when Borman moved into the office as associate dean.
And then Erlinson became dean of the Department of Educational Administration when Hawkins left.
So these activities, which were cross-departmental, and then when they became department heads, they were extra sensitive to cross-departmental
activity.
This sounds like it was all planned.
It was another thing that just worked out well.
But the organization with the inquiry groups, the inquiry groups solved what I've always believed.
Because as a dean, I'm sure you had this experience as a provost, too.
I found that when somebody asked me what is it that deans do, I would always come up with the notion that what deans do is 90% of that time is spent linking
Connecting.
Connecting faculty.
You've got faculty in different departments.
And faculty in the same department sometimes, with somebody five doors down the hall,
working in the same area and they don't talk to each other about it.
So as a dean, you see the whole college and you see that here's somebody over in psych who's got the same interests as somebody in curriculum and instruction and somebody in human resources.
And then you take the whole university.
And you, well, take genetics, for example, here at A&M.
There are 40 departments that have faculty members doing something.
Even the philosophy department has somebody doing ethics of DNA.
So you've got to find ways, structurally.
And we used team teaching.
We used this interdisciplinary area.
What we did, we put a lot of courses that graduate students from each department would take.
And we developed a system where the credit hour count would be returned to the department of the faculty member teaching the course, even though it wasn't taught in their department.
And it was easy to do here.
See, that would have taken me three months at Maryland.
I would have had to have written letters back and forth, but it was easy to pull off.
But I didn't want to move toward eliminating departments.
First, the faculty wasn't too excited about it.
And second, in a bigger institution like this, you might lose your budget.
The departments you inherited, summarize those.
Department of Educational Administration, Hal Hawkins was chair, and Department of Educational Psychology,
Department of Curriculum and Instruction, Department of Interdisciplinary Studies, Department of Health and Physical Education.
Those were the departments.
Special Ed was in Ed Psych.
It wasn't a separate department.
Ag Ed was in agriculture, but we treated it just like a department in the College of Education.
They had their department person in Ag Ed and it really worked very well because of the people.
Herman Brown was chair.
Industrial ed was not in industrial engineering.
It was the interdisciplinary ed department, and that department had a mixture.
It was kind of a smorgasbord of industrial ed, ed tech, and vocational education was all in that department.
You expected the department heads to act as head or as chairman?
They were heads because they made budgetary decisions.
They knew they were responsible for the hiring and development.
They knew that they were responsible for the students.
graduate and advising and all of this.
And we stuck with that.
And we had a lot of sessions, developmental sessions with the departments on promotion and tenure policies and things like this.
And then we used the inquiry groups
to do a lot of the cross-departmental development stuff.
We used to have two conferences a year just for college faculty and students, in which they would share their inquiry.
And then the third year, we started to invite people from the schools in.
And we'd have a conference over at the community center or the Brazos County thing.
And the reason we did this, we were meeting faculty at these national conferences, giving papers from our own faculty, and didn't know until we got to the national meeting.
So we said, let's have our own inquiry conference.
So we had these conferences, and whatever people were working on in terms of their inquiry areas, they'd share them with everybody else.
And we'd have panels.
And it was all set up by the faculty inquiry activity, not the dean's office.
And I've always believed that you don't run programs out of the dean's office.
That even if it's an interdisciplinary program, it has to be situated in a department, because that's where your faculty workloads are formed.
It's not getting the dean's
assigning people to tasks.
That was a little different than sometimes they'd been used to, but I've always believed that.
And if you can get to your department heads to see themselves as college leaders, not just department leaders, then they are going to be willing.
Like, we located the Research Assistance Lab in Ed Psych, but it served all the different departments.
Did you have another
College of Education as a model?
Did you have any?
No, I just had the belief that faculty needed to develop what made sense.
And I believe that you can't, that each organization and each program must emerge from the setting in which it's going to operate.
See, at Vermont, we were going to merge social work.
I hired 58 new faculty.
And there were only 21 people there when I went there.
So we went off for a three day retreat.
It ended up a five day retreat because we got snowed in.
And by the time we came back from that retreat,
The faculty had decided that they didn't want to have departments.
They wanted these program areas.
And so I went in to see Al Rawlins, who was the provost, and I said, Al, the faculty has just decided we ought to do away with departments.
We're going to try a new organization.
And his response was, he kind of sweeps his hands together like this, and he said, boy, that ought to be fun.
And he later became president at Old Dominion, one of my good buddies.
When did you begin to think you were making progress?
I felt right off at the retreat when we got such an enthusiastic response to the ideas.
And the way people dealt with each other.
Lots of respect for each other across departments.
Very professional, you know.
Great, great ideas.
One of the things that came out of the, actually it was the first retreat, was the idea of setting up connections with school districts, where we'd get the school districts to come up with some money, we'd come up with some money, and we'd have teachers doing research.
not just faculty members, where the actual principal investigator would be a teacher.
And then we'd have these conferences where the teachers would report to each other,
And we got 12 superintendents and 12 districts to join together.
Jim McNamara actually headed it up its first few years, where they actually did studies of dropouts and stuff, which they shared with each other.
You know, school districts weren't doing a lot of that sharing, especially that kind of information.
And so we were able to build a structure to connect us around inquiry with school districts so that our, you know, profession itself
And we had a lot of people in leadership roles.
You know, we always had the School Boards Institute here.
Hubert had set all of this up.
We had the academic administrators, the training thing that he had worked with years and that you and Brian, you know, the program that Brian Cole now had.
And then we had the superintendent's conference here.
So there were a lot of connections already developed that linked us with our professional groups.
And what I found from the day I came here, that I was viewed by the state as a state leader.
Hubert had developed that.
The institution had developed wonderful relationships with the state education department.
When Bowen, you remember, was commissioner.
He and Hubert worked very closely together.
And that kind of helped me because I got very active working with the TEA, Texas Education Agency.
And then when the parole committee was created, I was
asked to be on the parole committee.
I was the only educator on the committee, which turned out to be one of the most interesting experiences of my life, going all over the state with him for ten and a half months.
I could write a book about that experience.
But the college was in a position of being a state leader.
When we get into the business of reforming teacher education,
We became the center for the Holmes Group.
The Holmes Group was created with about 100 of the major universities in the United States to take a look at their teacher education programs.
We worked with six of the other institutions in the state, Texas Tech, Baylor,
Trinity, UT, UMH, and ourselves.
And we were moving ahead to create some really interesting five-year programs in teacher ed where we'd have a good general education and a major in a discipline for four years and then create a professional year and then a three-year induction period.
And we were moving pretty fast on that until we bumped into Senator Parker.
And that was at the time after the parole committee.
They created another committee to study teacher education, and he came up with this bill, Senate Bill 94, which said that no teacher should be taking more than 18 credit hours in education.
So that was Senator Parker.
Senator Parker didn't have a very healthy view of colleges of education.
He made a statement one time that if
If prostitutes, drug dealers, and deans of education are against him, he knew he was on the right side.
But that was another example of how this institution stuck by me.
We had spent two years developing with our faculty, not just in teacher ed, but the whole college and people in the arts and sciences, as you know, in colleges of education, students take their majors outside of the college in the disciplines.
So you had math, science.
We had 29
fields of study outside the College of Education in four different colleges, four other colleges.
So we had good collaboration from the other colleges.
And we spent two years
That little book up there is a report of the national conference we had on the future of teacher education here.
We brought on all the top people in the country here, and we came up with this plan.
And the faculty approved it unanimously, not just in curriculum instruction, but all of them.
So we went to the coordinating board to get this approved.
About the same time they passed this legislation.
There was nothing in the bill that said that you had to have a four-year program if you're going to develop a five-year program.
But the way Parker interpreted it, he interpreted it to say that you had to have a four-year program
along with your five-year program.
And our view was that you ought to have some institutions that aren't just doing teacher education, they're doing research on teacher education.
And that we ought to be leading the nation, institutions like this,
And these five others.
Well, anyway, we put the coordinating head of Ashworth in a tough position there.
He was between Parker and us.
And so we had a big meeting with him.
He wanted us to back off.
The provost office here went with me and they said, no, don't back off.
If the legislature starts getting into the position of thinking they can prescribe programs for teacher ed, they might think they can do it for all programs.
And that's not what legislators ought to be doing.
Prescribing courses in medicine and law and business.
So the issue wasn't our program necessarily.
The issue became with them, we don't want
state legislators deciding that we ought to have so many credit hours in this professional program.
So we made a deal with Ashworth that he would get the coordinating board to approve our five-year program, and we had agreed to go ahead and develop a four-year program.
We wouldn't have to recommend anybody take it, because you can't prepare an elementary ed teacher in 18 hours.
So anyway, we did.
And the coordinating board approved it.
We were the only program, because we were ready that they approved.
By the time the other institutions got around, you couldn't get it through.
And UT backed off anyway.
When you got here, what image did you get statewide?
for Texas A&M's education program.
What was our image in 1980?
Image in 1980 was very good.
They sung the praises of the graduates of this institution.
Every school district that I talked with, of course, when I traveled, in 83, three years after I got here, I traveled all over the state.
So I got a good